---
title: 'Language bindings for ADG'
description: 'How you should typically use the ADG canvas library: the language bindings and the higher level languages approach'
---
Great care has been taken in order to have a good bindingability: this project
has been based on GObject introspection specifically for providing a good base
for language bindings.

## Lua bindings
![Sample drawing generated by Lua bindings](/img/adg-demo-lua.png)

Lua bindings are actively maintained by the ADG project and they are
effectively used to check the bindingability of the ADG and CPML APIs. They are
based on the [LGI project](https://github.com/pavouk/lgi/) and should work out
ot the box, that is if you install ADG and LGI you automatically have Lua
bindings availables.

`adg-lua` **is not** required for using ADG from Lua. It is just an example
application and provides a code example and a testcase for these bindings.

LGI uses GObject introspection **at runtime** to access the underlying APIs, so
the bindings are always in sync with the latest installed libraries. This also
means that the order in which the libraries are installed (i.e. ADG before and
LGI after, or the reverse) does not matter.

## Python bindings

Python support should work without doing anything specific, provided you have
[PyGObject](https://pygobject.readthedocs.io/) properly installed and
configured on your system.

A pre-packaged version of **PyGObject**, together with a selected set
GObject-based libraries (ADG canvas included) for 32-bit Windows platforms was
provided [on SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/pygobjectwin32/),
but this project seems to have been recently abandoned.

## Other programming languages

The GObject introspection technology is used by [a lot of
bindings](https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users.html) that provides support
for many programming languages, including [JavaScript](https://gjs.guide/),
[Rust](https://gtk-rs.org/), [Ruby](http://ruby-gnome2.osdn.jp/) and many
others.

If the bindings for your favourite language are already provided (and if they
are properly implemented), the ADG should be automatically supported
out-of-the-box once installed.
